# colored-ASEP
Julia code to simulate the height function of colored ASEP, as in http://arxiv.org/abs/2403.01341

In brief, colored ASEP is an interacting particle system on the integer lattice $\mathbb Z$. There is one parameter, $q\in [0,1)$, which is called the asymmetry parameter. At time zero, there is at most one particle per site, and every particle has an associated integer known as its color (multiple particles can have the same color). The system is evolved according to independent Poisson clocks: each site has two associated to it, one which rings at rate $q$ and the other which rings at rate 1. When the rate $q$ clock rings, if there is a particle at the associated site, it attempts to jump one site to the left; if that neighboring site is empty, the attempt succeeds, and otherwise it is blocked. The same happens when the rate 1 clock rings except that the attempt is one site to the right.

The colored height function of the model is $h_t:\mathbb Z^2 \to \mathbb Z$ and is defined by letting $h_t(x,y)$ be the flux of particles of color at least $x$ which have crossed across $y$ by time $t$ (by flux we mean that a paticle contributes $+1$ for crossing from left to right and $-1$ for the opposite direction).

The code here simulates the evolution of the colored height function started from a special initial condition known as the packed initial condition: at time $0$, there is a particle of color $-x$ present at site $x$ for every $x\in\mathbb Z$. It is proven in http://arxiv.org/abs/2403.01341 that the height functon from this special initial condition, approiately rescaled, converges to a putatively universal scaling limit from the Kardar-Parisi-Zhang universality class known as the directed landscape.

Since the system is an infinite one, some special probabilistic properties of the model (known as color merging) as well as some approximations are made to produce the simulation. However, in spite of the approximations, the deviation of the simulated height function from the true height function is a random quantity whose tails decay exponentially; in particular, the error is $O(1)$. This error is negligible after the scaling necessary for convergence to the directed landscape is taken into account.
